Okay, I now call this meeting
of the South Portland City Council to order on Tuesday,
December 9th, 2025.
Please stand as you wish to for the Pledge of Allegiance
to the Republic that is the United States.
I pledge allegiance
To the flag of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it stands.
One nation under God, individual liberty
And justice for all.
Madam Clerk, may we have a roll call, please?
Counselor Coleman. Here. Counselor Matthews? Yes ma'am.
Counselor Pride Here. Counselor Walker Here.
Counselor West here. Counselor Scott here. And Mayor Tipton
Here. Um,
we wanted to thank Counselor Walker
for joining us virtually.
Um, she is dealing with a family matter, excuse me, out
of state, but she has persevered and is joining us.
Will we be able to see Councilor Walker at some point,
or that's not how it works?
Your Honor, I might be able to change the view here.
I'm not sure
When she speaks. Right.
Let's see.
I can speak. There she is.
Aha. We do. Oh, very nice. Thank you again. Nice
Background.
Um, unless there are additions
or corrections to the minutes of our last,
I believe last two meetings, um, we will pass them
by unanimous consent.
Any, anything? Okay, those have passed.
We're now going to move to the petitions
and communications section of the meeting.
And looks like our first candidate
is the assessor for the city.
Yes. Thank you, uh, mayor and counselors.
Uh, tonight we have our assessor, Brent Martin here.
Uh, you may recall Brent was here last year, uh,
late in the summer to talk a little bit about the
equalization, uh, process that had happened
with property values.
Uh, last year. Uh, the work continues, um, uh, this year.
So Brent wanted to provide a bit of an update
and be able to answer any questions that, uh,
counsel may have.
So, uh, I will turn it over to Brent
and, uh, let me also get you on the screen here if I can.
All right. We're showing you desktop, at least that's,
uh, half the battle.
Hmm. Is that a, is that a Dell?
Nope, it's, uh, Lenovo. Let's try it again here.
Then there's an F seven. Uh,
See if it just needed to do it once it was activated.
There You go. There we go. Alright.
So some of what's in here, uh, will
be repetitive from last year and will probably be repetitive
and years forward, uh, so
that it informs people the function
and role of the assessor, that I'm not just an employee
of the city, but also to represent the interests
of the taxpayers as well as that of the state.
So it's a balancing act that I have to at least try
to maintain as best as I can.
Um, so with that, what our assessors we're agents
of the state of Maine responsible for maintaining fair
and equitable assessments across all property
types on an annual basis.
Uh, emphasis on the annual basis part, which, uh,
was fortunately more emphasized last year than this year,
and hopefully going into next year stays less emphasized.
Um, we have a lot of training each year.
Um, sometimes it's in excess of 60, 70, uh, credit hours.
Um, and we, uh, as I was saying, answer equally
to taxpayers, uh, property owners, the city
and the state, Uh, we're charged with, uh,
certain part of the main state constitution.
Uh, in particular you'll see just value in there.
All taxes upon real
and personal estate assessed by authority
of this state shall be apportioned
and assessed equally according to the just value thereof.
And further by statute, uh, we basically have to apply
what we would call the highest
and best use, uh, of properties on a yearly basis, uh,
because of technology over time.
And, and, um, that goes back to that just value comment, uh,
in the Constitution
where even if we don't have it exactly right, we try
to have it fair and equitable versus, uh, properties
of similar nature, uh, situation
and value as, uh, as each other.
Uh, so what does our office do overall? It's myself.
Um, there are two residential field appraisers
who also do a lot of personal property work
and, uh, an additional commercial
and an industrial appraiser.
Um, he is, is a fixture to the city.
He has been here for quite some time.
Uh, and we have an admin assistant, uh, as well
who was cross-trained in finance, uh, here at the city
before coming to the assessing department.
Um, so this past year we had 10,334
real property accounts,
1,373 taxable personal property accounts,
which was 60 less than the year prior.
Uh, we had gone through an extensive auditing process, uh,
this spring, which had reduced the number of accounts there,
but then we had, uh, more filings under the Betty program,
um, a little bit more comprehensive.
Um, and, uh, we had kind of, um,
brought them, uh, into the program so
that they would have the, uh,
best tax benefit available to them.
And I'll talk about that a little further.
Uh, so we do, uh, determine the eligibility for both real
and personal property exemptions as well as reimbursements.
Uh, we correct high
or low assess valuations, uh, through abatements
as well as supplements.
Um, and then just adjustments to the data.
Uh, we have to, on a yearly basis,
adjust the depreciation schedules on the personal property.
Uh, business equipment, uh, have to report to the state,
uh, sales ratio study on a yearly basis, um,
and provide, we have to provide estimates
during the budgetary process, uh, of
what the valuation base changes might be
by the time we commit taxes and set the budget.
And at times we have to defend against abatement requests
that do not appear to meet the burden of proof, uh, on the,
uh, taxpayer's, uh, behalf.
So on a daily basis, um,
we talk quite a bit about property values.
Um, I don't think a day goes by
where we're not talking about one type or another.
Uh, today it already started with, uh, uh,
uh, movie theater.
Uh, so that was a surprise today
to start talking about movie theater valuations.
But you never know what
you're gonna run into when you get here.
Um, but we have, uh, multiple approaches
to value on each property type.
So there's a, uh, sales comparison or market approach.
There's an income approach,
and then there's a, uh, cost approach,
and we have to reconcile those, um, when we do deal with
property owners, uh, so that we can apply the right, uh,
appraisal approach to determine the value of the properties.
Uh, in the state of Maine, we have
to review all the reported sales
and comment whether the sales
that occur throughout the year are arms length
or market value sales, whether it's the entire parcel, uh,
and also whether when they are single family residential,
including condos with accessory dwelling units.
That's called a sales ratio study.
Uh, because every municipality in the state has
this property type, it's what the state uses to keep it fair
amongst municipalities so
that we all keep our assessments relatively close to,
um, market value.
And that's kind of, uh, the only real leverage
that the state has in saying, if you stay close
to within 10% of market value,
then you'll have a full reimbursement
and you can have all the benefits of the exemptions
that are offered to the public.
So, um, this, uh, is a slide
that, uh, this slide in the next, it talks about
what historically, I mean, literally
for decades you had a reasonable expectation that a third
of most property values would go up, a third would go down,
and a third would stay roughly the same.
And in that process, um, you'd end up with really no change
of how much money was coming in.
Uh, you would just end up with, um, the data being improved
and, and tracking the data.
Um, and you'll see on this next slide, it's just kind
of gets in the weeds,
but it's essentially saying there's no extra money
that's coming into the municipality.
Uh, once the budget is set, it's just a matter
of when we do make changes, someone might be paying more,
and it might not be a third, it might be 20%,
or it might be, uh,
that property type might be paying 40% of the tax bill.
So there's, um, in the past there had been kind
of this third, third, third, as was talked about last year,
there was a sudden large shift
because of some stale data
that we had worked to catch up on.
Uh, and that had moved last year,
the residential property values, um,
much greater than the third versus the, uh, commercial
and industrial property values.
This year we had such a small percentage increase
to the overall taxable valuation base, um,
that it wasn't too much to measure.
We're gonna see it in future slides,
but, um, there was still a continuation
of slight adjustments to residential.
We did lose some commercial, uh,
property value that became exempt.
I I say commercial,
but it was large scale residential, uh, that qualified
for real property exemptions.
Uh, we had a couple of appeals, uh,
that were on the commercial side of things
that they had prevailed,
and we had slight reductions in values on those.
So that's really the only difference.
And apart from that, there would not have been much of a,
a change in the, uh, percentage burden to residential.
But again, we'll get to that in one second.
So last year, uh,
we were looking at an average sold price per, uh,
multiple listings of 543,000.
And I'm just using this as a third party
kind of as a reference.
And this year, um, going through the same, same time period,
we see a pretty good size jump of eight 9%.
Uh, without getting into the weeds,
you have slightly higher quality, better condition homes
that are selling at the higher amount.
We have a little bit more inventory,
so it's a little bit more competitive at the higher amount.
Um, so really
I don't think it's a true 8.8% increase.
Um, but we definitely still have demand quite a bit here
in, in South Portland.
Um, and as long as it's a reasonable asking price
and there aren't major issues with the home,
it's probably still going.
So this is a breakdown by neighborhood, kind
of given the dashboard view of, um, in internally.
Um, what I go off from on
identifying which neighborhoods are tracking
maybe a little better
with their value accuracy than other neighborhoods.
And so we may go in
and have to factor land in one neighborhood a little more
than another neighborhood, uh,
to get the values more in line with the other neighborhoods.
And it's not an exact science, uh, I'd love to say
that we could always hit it exactly right.
It feels great when we do,
and there's some sale that happens a year
after we were arguing about a value, and it comes right in.
But, um, it's, uh, not always the case.
So South Portland in particular, um,
I think since the early two thousands has always done
in-house, uh, equalization work
or revaluation work with minimal outside help.
Um, and they do so,
or the city has done so to, to keep that valuation close
to a hundred percent to, uh, make sure
that the property owners get a hundred percent
of their homestead exemptions
or veterans exemptions, blind exemptions,
whatever's available, and also make sure
that we get the full amount
of reimbursement from the, uh, state.
Um, so this past year we, um, I was a little bit surprised,
but, uh, despite having a comprehensive report I had given
to the state last year, the state had said we were gonna be
around 68%.
So fortunately it was, uh,
what I mean is the assessed values
that they had on record were way lower than
what I had on our record.
So fortunately it was just a filing that I had to submit
to them and only took a few hours to put together.
And, uh, we were able to declare a hundred percent this year
with a very small number of adjustments.
So, um, but yeah, I had a nightmare.
So, uh, uh,
this just discusses the quality rating, um,
because we do so much field work in-house, uh, with, uh,
tracking, whether it's permit activity, uh,
just updating records when we're driving by talking
with people, um, photos online, uh, discussions with people,
sales surveys, all these different ways that we obtain data
and we're constantly updating what we have on file, um,
that keeps our quality rating low.
We're amongst staff,
we're constantly checking with each other.
Well, what do you think this is?
Is this a good quality home?
Or would you call that an average quality home?
And we try to stay consistent as much
as possible in such tight quarters.
Um, so that's, uh, uh, one
of the benefits of how we do things.
Some municipalities will wait
and every several years do a revaluation.
Uh, and sometimes you end up with different people
that come in and call different properties,
different things, and the data doesn't get as tight
as we have, uh, internally here.
So because of the quality of the data, we're able
to continue with this equalization process
and keep in years, like this year, keep those adjustments as
as tight as possible.
So it's very stable and,
and people don't feel the, the shock
of the tax, uh, changes.
So this year we jumped up to, I should say nudged up to, uh,
7.1 billion from 6.99,
basically 7 billion.
So, uh, up about 120, $125 million.
Uh, last year, to put it in perspective,
we were up 1.2 billion.
Uh, so it was substantial.
We basically only had a 10% move this year of
what we did last year.
Um, the, uh, year prior, you see
that we had gone from the 5.8 up to 6.99.
So that's why last year was such a, um,
jolting move to be honest.
Uh, the mill rate, you'd see, uh,
originally projections were,
I can't remember if it was 1383 or 1384.
Um, but because of the size of the adjustments, um,
that just got us barely over 91%, uh,
to declare the a hundred percent.
Um, it, it put the mill rate down to 1364.
So we were able to come in below what the projections were
during the budget process.
Um, and historically we still are on the low end
of the last 40 years of, of mill rates.
So that's, that's beneficial not just for residential,
but also on commercial properties that are facing a,
the equivalent of a 1.3% tax as opposed to, let's say,
closing in on 2%, which, uh, increases the number
of abatements from commercial properties.
Um, this is a repeat of the slide last year,
just showing the jump over the five year period,
113% from 2019 to 2024
of the change in single family residential.
Um, I can't tell you how many times I went over the slide
and kept checking the data.
I was like, whoa. But this year, fortunately,
we were looking at, it was just under a 3%
move on residential.
Um, there was still the, the tax burden shift.
Uh, you'll see the commercial
line was about a two point a half percent drop.
Uh, so you had the roughly 3% gain on the single family
residential and a two and a half percent drop.
So there's your, uh, tax burden shift that has,
has continued just a little bit.
Um, the land had gone up a little bit
and some of the industrial
properties had gone up a little bit.
Um, I had made a slight adjustment to some
of the oil storage tanks, um, that was justifiable,
I believe, after some data I'd come across.
Um, mostly in Portsmouth, Chelsea, Revere, mass, that area.
So we had made some, uh, some changes
to those, uh, properties.
Um, anyhow, uh, personal property
and, uh, business equipment tax exemption,
very negligible change.
We had a, uh, as you saw
before, high number of changes to the number of accounts,
but it kind of of all came out in the wash
with the valuation being about the same.
Um, after all those changes, uh, this is a slide from
this past year as well.
This showed the jump over that five year period.
Um, unfortunately, um, I wasn't able to tie in the data
that the link got corrupted, so I couldn't show the changes,
but you figured it's about a 1% to one
and a half percent change on the residential versus
commercial side this year, uh, is what I'd estimate on that.
And, uh, with that, this is what we had come in at, um,
1365 on the mill rate, uh, committed on September 11th,
uh, as of April 1st tax date.
Um, and the homestead is a $341
and 25 cent, um, benefit this year.
Uh, this just shows the mill rate history over the
last, uh, several years.
And, uh, I have just some examples I can more
or less just motor through.
But, um, here's a property in Thornton Heights.
Uh, $286,000 purchase.
Uh, we had assessed in 24, uh, at 3 23.
It stayed, uh, at 3 23
and ended up selling in October
of 24 at 3 55.
So we were coming in at a 91% ratio.
Another property, uh, assessed at 4 81.
That neighborhood had additional adjustments, I believe,
to the land, um, in meeting House Hill.
So we had reassessed in 25 and it sold for five 60.
So it's confirming our ratio coming in around 91%.
Uh, here's an example of where in meeting House Hill
we're still under, but we have to figure out why.
So here's where assessing isn't perfect,
but I wanted to point out how we're not perfect.
Um, but this would be the type of property that would want
to find out why it's sold for that much more than
what we have for the assessment based on the mass appraisal,
um, approach that we have.
Uh, here's a property over on cash corner where, uh,
slightly assessed slightly over what it was purchased for,
but where, uh, within a reasonable range of, of
what it would be assessed, uh, what it would sell for.
Oops. Um, let's see.
Yeah, so here's, uh, sunset Park Pennsylvania Ave.
That's a dated photo.
Um, looks a little different, uh, mostly just the roof,
but the, um, uh, you'll see it sold
for 500,000.
We had reassessed at 4 65, uh, with some of the, uh,
renovation work that was then considered.
So it's coming in around 93% condominiums.
Um, possibly some softening.
Uh, usually there's a hiccup in a year
after a large revaluation on condos
because the increase in taxes will compete
with the condo association fees.
Um, and so we have to kind of see what's gonna happen,
whether they stabilize or there's a really a
softening on the condos.
And we'll see that by April 1st of this year.
Um, another condo where, uh, it's purchased
for 6 27 and we had assessed at five 14.
So, um, little under,
and that's where we're still seeing, um,
strength in the condo market, even though the number
of sales has gone down quite a bit.
Uh, this gets in the weeds a little bit.
It's just discussing, uh, the personal property
and the business equipment tax exemption reimbursement
value, um, which is the taxable equivalent value.
And it's just in summary from the other slides,
we had such a nominal change in personal property,
both taxable and Betty, that it,
it really didn't change much
between the two years despite all the work we put into it.
Um, and with that, the last paragraph here,
you'll see it says in 24,
it was roughly a 10.9%, um, part
of the total taxable base or taxable equivalent base,
and that's their personal property, Betty
and homestead reimbursement.
And this year it was about 10.7%.
So it's, again, very, uh, it's not affecting the,
the tax shift, I guess you'd say, the personal property
and the business equipment isn't.
So it really comes down to when we do talk about tax shift,
the, uh, difference between the, um,
increase we've seen over the last couple
of years on residential property values versus the slower
increase, if any, on the commercial
and industrial properties.
And going forward,
we'll just continue examining the changes in the market
and playing the game of which
of these things is not like the other, um,
on some of the other properties.
And, uh, just keep making changes as we see fit
and try to keep them as stable as possible.
And any questions?
Yeah. Well first thanks.
Thank you so much, Brent, for taking, taking this on
for doing the job you do
and for leading us through this presentation.
Um, our council rules for petitions
and communications are, yes,
the counselors can ask questions,
but, um, this section is not open to public comment.
So, um, I, I will just give myself the one liberty
of asking quick question
before I ask if our other counselors have questions,
will this presentation be available
to the public in some way?
Yes, I, I can post it online
or Jessica, you tell me where to go with it.
Okay. It'll make it available online. Yeah. Alright.
I, you know, it may
or may not become a, a, you know, go viral on you,
but, um, I think some people might appreciate being able to
dig into it, so.
Sure. Alright, counselors, do we have any questions,
counselor? Scott,
I have what might be a very kindergarten question,
but you separate out commercial
and residential in the assessment.
And I am curious how commercial residential,
like residential that is not the private single family home
residential is set into that mix.
So if you're asking the question about
how we set our certified ratio,
then it's only the properties
that are essentially single family
and single family with accessory dwelling
and some consideration for condos.
So once you get into solid two to four units, or two units
and up, it wouldn't be part of what sets our ratio,
but all of those apartment buildings,
it could have 40 whatever units in them would all be under
the residential coding internally.
So it wouldn't be commercial in the true sense that you're,
you're thinking of, you'd get office space, all of those,
um, those would end up being commercial properties, uh,
storefront, uh, the mall.
Um, and then industrial, you'd have storage tanks, uh,
semiconductor, um,
large scale nursing home facility over there on running,
uh, running Hill Road.
So that would be how it's broken up.
But I can send you the breakdown that actually shows by code
and the first digit of the code would show
whether it's considered residential,
whether it's considered commercial, like
Okay. But residential,
even in a sort
of more commercial setting is still considered residential.
Yeah, it's, yes. Thank you. Mm-hmm.
Other questions from counselors? Come on.
Okay. Well, if there aren't any, I will allow myself
to ask one more.
Um, I'm trying to phrase it appropriately.
Um, a couple of times
during the presentation you did reference to,
especially two years ago, um, the shock
of the tax changes.
And at one point you said jolting move,
and I think we do have residents who would agree with
that kind of an assessment of what they experienced.
Um, when will we have an inkling, do we have it now,
um, that we can go public on as to whether they will, again,
feel that kind of change?
So, so April 1st is our kind
of our snapshot date.
So if, for instance,
let's say there was a major correction in the market
and there was a lot of sales that occurred between now
and April 1st, then we might consider that we actually have
to make some reductions on a certain property type,
assuming the, let's say the reductions were in residential,
but let's say the adjustments that would be warranted
really don't change the assessed values.
We still have enough of a buffer
for those assessed values versus
what the new sales are coming in at.
So under that scenario, we feel that we're pretty robust.
If the sales keep coming in higher than the assessed values,
it gets a little more in the weeds where we would then,
if you notice the one slide I had in here, um,
I might be looking at an individual neighborhood
where there's enough sales in that neighborhood
that make up what's called the central
section of the properties.
I'm analyzing for the sales ratio study with the state.
And so I might have
to make adjustments in select neighborhoods in order
to justify the whole ratio being at a hundred percent.
So it's, it's basically saying I'm looking
to equalize the least amount of properties I can
to maintain a, it's, it's, um, I'm trying to think
of a good analogy, but it's a drip method.
It's using something very, uh,
more methodical than doing it all at once.
And with the prior, uh,
changeover in assessors when Jim had retired
and there had been, um, concerns
that if Jim had made adjustments
before he retired, either a, he wasn't gonna be here
to defend them or he was worried that there was going
to be a bubble from COVID
that would've already corrected by now.
So there was hesitation to have been as, uh, as aggressive
as he could have been at the time.
And, and it's, that was just, uh, discretion at the time.
Many, many, many assessors across the state did do that.
Um, and now they're catching up.
Um, so, uh,
the short answer is I think our values are
very robust right now.
And I feel comfortable, and I've never said this
before, I feel more comfortable feeling more stable
going into this period with the number of sales I'm seeing.
It's not gonna say, I'm not gonna say there's no adjustments
going in the next year, but I anticipate they'll be like
this year far fewer.
Um, and hopefully we don't have some,
like we had this past year, we did have some large last
minute, um, real property exemption requests on, uh,
uh, I'll I'll say eligible properties that
that could be, could be exempt.
So that had decreased, um, the amount of taxable base
and it increased the mill rate a little bit.
So, uh, if we don't have that
and I have just simple adjustments on
residential, then we should be good.
And I just wanted to, um, hear you say for our, um, some
of our tax reduction ta um, programs available
to our residents, there's been an April 1st deadline
to apply that is going to remain the deadline.
I actually, I'm not positive about that
because I know that they're pushing for at least one of them
to be all the way up until commitment,
and I don't know if that's passed.
Okay. Um, I think it's, if the homes, um, how,
how do I say this the right way?
We are very friendly towards receiving our homestead
exemptions on a timely basis.
Okay. I, okay. I think we all have heard that.
Yeah. Sooner is better. Might be a another we'd like
Of saying to see them before April 1st is very important
that they are received by us and dated by April 1st.
Okay. A senior tax program, the deadline is May 1st
and it does have to be reapplied for every year.
It's unlike the homestead exemption,
Senior is May one.
Got it. Alright, well I think we can move on then.
Thank you again. Thank you very much.
Um, uh, Leah Duffy, our
economic development director, is going
to lead a monthly business Spotlight Recognition, I believe.
Yes. Okay,
Well thank you. Leah
Duffy, economic Development Director.
Um, so quarterly we're trying to recognize our, um,
monthly business spotlights.
And so over, uh, the last few months, let's see, in October,
um, we had, uh, Artemis, um,
which is a plus size thrift.
And then I feel like I'm having, you know,
like this is a quiz. Um,
No, no, no.
And then, um, in November North,
Oh, thank you. North 43
Bistro, which is a great location,
uh, right on the water.
We have very few restaurants where you get
to enjoy the beautiful water view and that is one of them.
And then just recently, we, uh, visited down, uh,
with trademark, um, credit, federal Credit Union,
which is one of the swankiest coolest looking, um,
bank buildings, I think in the whole city.
Um, great people in there, um, a lot of energy
and very committed to our community.
They do a lot of work with our fire station.
Um, and so it was just really fun to get to know them.
And what we do with this program is, it's a recognition
through social media newsletter,
but we are also, um, doing some videos
where those are accessible
and viewed on S-B-C-T-V, um, give them a little bit
of a shout out, um, kind of ahead
of our annual business awards, which is the next, uh,
thing coming up in January. So
Say the date. Come on. This is
February 25th, is the celebration.
Yes. Thank you very much. Thanks, Leah.
Okay, so we have now reached the appointment calendar,
and if there is no objection, we're going to postpone that
by unanimous consent to our next meeting on January 6th.
I don't see any objections. Thank you.
Um, and now we'll move to the consent calendar,
but first, could we have our rules
for public comment read aloud,
Members of the public are invited to comment on any topic,
on or off the agenda during citizen discussion, part one
or part two for up to three minutes.
If you are here to speak on an item appearing on tonight's
agenda, you are encouraged to wait
until this item comes up on the agenda
where you will have three minutes to speak.
If you are unable to wait, you may speak
during citizen discussion part one,
however, you will not be permitted to speak on the topic.
Again. Similarly, a member of the public
who speaks on the topic when it comes up on the
agenda, may not speak on the topic.
Again, during citizen discussion, part two,
all speakers are asked to state their
name and address for the record.
Okay, thank you. And I just wanted to also add
that when you do public comment, um,
you'll see a little timer running on the screens.
And when you have 30 seconds left to bring your comments
to a close, our clerk is going to let you know about that.
So, alright.
Could you please now read the items on the consent calendar?
Order number 97 25 26,
land Care Management Advisory Committee, Al Huntley,
resident member for District four for a term
that expires on January 30th, 2029.
Order number 1 16 25 26 award of bid number 10 26
for Biosolid Management to Sela in the amount
of $750,000 funded by the Waste
Resource Protection Sludge Disposal Fund.
All items read on the consent calendar
require a majority vote.
Thank you. Do any of our counselors wish
to move an item from the consent calendar?
We don't seem to wanna do that. All right.
If there is anyone here who wants
to make a comment on an item that's on the consent calendar,
this is our time for doing that
on the consent calendar only.
Okay, well, we don't seem to have people who want to do
that, so it's time to vote on the consent calendar items.
What is the wish of the council
Counselor Matthews move forward.
Move for passage second. Seconded by Counselor Pride.
All in favor? Now. Roll call.
We have to do a roll call vote
because we are doing a hybrid meeting.
So could you lead us in that
Counselor Coleman?
Yes. Counselor Matthews. Yes. Counselor Pride. Yes.
Counselor Walker? Yes. Counselor West. Yes.
Counselor Carter? Yes. And Mayor. Mayor Tipton.
It happens every year.
Um, Yes. Thank you. Thank
You.
Okay. Now we have reached the time
for our first public comment period.
For items on or off the agenda, if you prefer
to make a comment on an item that's on the agenda, um, wait
until that comes up.
Um, but please remember to, if you're making a comment now
to state your name, your, the street you live on.
Um, and you're going to have three minutes.
Does anyone wish to make a comment,
Mayor?
Yes. Were we going to, um, talk,
decide now about whether comments are gonna be allowed on
the next item so people know whether
or not to comment here or not?
Um, I, I think that we don't have to do that right now.
Okay. Okay. So, alright. Hi. Nice to see you.
Nice to see you. Um, my name's Olivia Montgomery.
I live at 3 7 3 Ocean Street, um, in District three.
I am a social worker and a professor of social work.
Um, before I ask my question, I just wanna express thanks
for how many opportunities
that you all have offered residents
to be involved in the Mahoney design process.
Um, and particularly over the past few months,
it's been very clear how much you want this
to be a collaborative process,
and it's just really appreciated.
So thank you. Uh, I recall hearing at one
of the walkthroughs at Mahoney that there were plans
to use the current city buildings for housing potentially.
So I have two questions about that.
The first is, when will residency a more fully developed
plan for the vacated buildings?
And two, what opportunities exist for community members
to participate in the development of that plan
and ensure that it includes
affordable housing opportunities? That's it.
Wow. In record time. Thank you so much. You're
Welcome. Should I stay here?
Um, what we generally do is have people, everyone
who wants to make a comment, do that,
and then at the end of that,
the city manager answers the questions.
Perfect. So, all right. Thank you. Thanks.
Anyone else to make a comment?
Ah, I see someone else come forward.
Um, hi. Thank you. First congratulations, Elise.
Oh, thank you. Uh, my name is Zenya Pantos
and I live on Hall Street across from Elise.
Um, and my, do I start with my statement
or do I start with, with my question?
You can. Either one is, works for
Us, but that doesn't count as my question. Right.
Okay. Um, okay.
My statement is that as a parent who has a small child,
I feel really committed to being in South Portland
and being part of South Portland government
and understanding what's going on.
Um, however, attending city council
and committee meetings in person is really difficult.
Um, I'm on a committee
and in order for me to come to the committee, my spouse has
to do all the childcare, um, which happens, but it's hard.
Um, so for example, we're both here in attendance tonight,
and in order to do that, we had to plan ahead
and hire a babysitter and pay her.
Um, it's costing us over $40 to attend this meeting.
Um, I understand I could have listened in virtually,
but without the, the opportunity to make public comment
and be engaged in what's going on,
it doesn't really feel like an option for like, the way
that I wanna be involved in this city.
So my question is, has the remote or
and hybrid policy been revisited recently?
And is there an option for the city to have a workshop
to revisit that policy all?
See, and that's everything. Thank you.
Thank you. Boy,
we have some very concise commenters tonight.
I can change that. No worries. Um, good evening.
My name is Carly Williams. I'm Zenia spouse.
So I also live across the street from Elise.
Um, and congratulations also.
Um, and thank you to all of you for serving.
I know it's not a very, it's kind of a thankless task often.
Um, so my comment is also about virtual, um, the ability
to make virtual comment.
Um, I understand that in the past the city has offered
opportunities for virtual comment,
but due to some hateful rhetoric
and zoom bombings that, um, practice is now sort
of, of yesteryear.
And also that is the case for most
of the committees in the city.
Um, and I'm standing here today to ask you to reconsider
that policy and to change it.
Um, I wanted to attend a committee in September
to make public comment, but I had a meeting at 9:00 AM
and I just simply couldn't go.
Um, I couldn't make my comment and so I just ended up not,
and, um, similarly, tonight we're paying over $40
so we can both comment
'cause we both really believe in this.
Um, hybrid
and virtual meetings are a really great way
to make local government
and all government, um, accessible to the public, both
for people who work full-time jobs or have small children
or are living with physical disabilities,
working night shifts.
Um, you name it, it just increases accessibility.
Um, I of course understand the need
to protect against hateful rhetoric.
And so I've done some research.
Um, I talked to the city of Portland.
I talk, I called the main state legislature
because I know you can make virtual comment,
which I've done virtual testimony different.
Um, but both of those, um, organizations
or, you know, I don't know, yeah,
organizations were very willing to talk
with me about their Zoom setups
and they were both very, um, effusive about how simple it is
to set up a webinar in order to allow
and have sort of management over the ability for
how long people can speak
and when different people can speak.
And that is how they protect against this.
Um, and I know that Biddeford also our,
our fellow neighbor Biddeford, um,
also has these practices really, like,
it's very on their website, that that is a real,
a priority of theirs.
Um, so I would be happy to share
with anyone more about what I learned.
And also I spoke with two different people.
I have their names, um, at Portland
and the main state legislature,
and they said they'd be happy to speak
with anyone in South Portland, um, if people wanted
to learn more about that.
Um, so I think my, my questions are, um, if,
if the city has explored the technology that other towns
and municipalities are currently using to
increase virtual accessibility for public comment, um,
and if so, what did you learn?
And also who the, the staff person is that we would connect
with about this or that would be responsible
for pushing something like this forward. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Okay.
Do we have anyone else wishing please come on up.
Uh, good evening. Uh, Rosemary DeAngelo Pleasantdale.
I'm gonna start with saying what I say every
time I stand up here.
Uh, when the clerk speaks, it's too fast.
So somebody else needs to say this besides me,
but, um, it just needs to slow down.
Not everyone listening is a native English speaker.
It's hard for me to even keep up with the rate, um,
with which the, the delivery is done.
So, uh, that's it.
Um, I am here as a representative of the school board
and as many of you know, we presently employ
George ENT whistle as our interim superintendent.
We're beginning our search
for superintendent tomorrow night begins that search.
I want to both notify
and invite the public to our workshop tomorrow evening
where the school board will have three recruiting firms,
do presentations at five o'clock,
will be main school management association.
Doing their presentation at six o'clock will be
New England School Development Council NES eq.
And at seven o'clock will be Zeal Education Group doing
their presentation.
There'll be an opportunity for school board members
to ask questions in between,
and the public is invited to attend
because this will be a workshop.
It will include an open audience where anyone is welcome
to speak for three minutes
to give the school board any opinion or feedback.
I'd like to invite the council as well.
And, um, the workshop will take place in the lecture hall
at South Portland High School.
We hope to have input from all the stakeholders
throughout this process.
This will not be the only opportunity,
but it is the start of the process
and the first to tell the school board what you think, given
that the schools are 61%, this is the second thing
that I say every time I stand up here, 61%
of the property taxes, I'm hoping
that people become involved in this process.
Our budget season will begin this month,
and we will invite the public
to watch the school department website for the posting
of all our meetings and participate in that process as well.
Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anyone else who'd like
to make a comment at this time?
If no one in here, we do have John Murphy, uh, on Zoom.
Who wishes to comment?
Okay. I don't see anyone in the room. Mr. Murphy.
Bring him on.
John, you'll have to unmute yourself.
Ah, okay. There we go. How's that?
Good, good evening Council. Um, I wanted to stop.
Can you hear me all right? Yes. Yes. Okay.
I wanted to just start by, uh, um, congratulating the, uh,
the new mayor and, uh,
the new councilors Councilor Kotter Scott.
Um, welcome to district one, um,
and the, all the others that were reelected.
And frankly, I just wanted
to thank everybody for their service.
I've, uh, realized
how much effort goes into being a
counselor and how much time it takes.
Um, and, uh, I can appreciate, uh,
what you folks are doing a little better.
So, having said that, um, I just had a couple of questions.
I, I agree with the, uh, comments about the, uh, uh,
virtual meetings and, uh, being able to speak.
I wasn't sure as I was watching this.
I've, uh, if I would be able to speak tonight from
what the two, uh, past, uh, speakers have said.
So I'm glad that I'm, I was able to speak,
but I do think it's an important tool
'cause I had planned on being there tonight,
but, uh, my son borrowed my truck, so here I am.
Uh, anyways, um, I just wanted to say that
and, uh, wish everybody a, uh, a happy New Year
and a merry Christmas and, uh, um,
thank you for what you're doing.
Well, thank you, Mr. Murphy. Glad you could be with us.
Okay. Um, we did hear some questions, so Mr. City manager.
Yeah. So, um, questions about the status of, uh,
city buildings if there were
to be a consolidation at Mahoney?
Um, so no decision has been made, uh, um,
definitively about
what would happen if the library site at this site
and the old Hamlin school site, um, were vacated
and consolidated into Mahoney.
But that is a discussion that this council will have.
Uh, and there will be opportunities
for the public to comment.
Um, it has been discussed at prior forums that, um, uh,
you know, one of the benefits of consolidating at Mahoney is
that more housing can actually fit on these three lots
that would be vacated than could at the Mahoney site.
Um, uh, but that doesn't mean they all have to be housing.
There could be, um, other uses,
but ultimately it'll be up to the public
and really the council to, to figure out, um, what happens
and there would be time to do so.
Um, uh, you know, even if the Mahoney bond passes next year,
um, that project isn't gonna happen overnight.
And, um, uh, there'll be, um, there'll be some time
where if the council hasn't figured out by then, uh,
that there, there will be opportunity to,
to figure it out and have public comment.
Um, uh, in terms of the hybrid meeting policy, ironically,
the council, you may recall,
we did talk about this last week when the council was
talking about updates to their, uh, to their rules
and, um, Uh, updates to their rules.
And so, um, uh, one of the things that we agreed on was
that the mayor, um, and I would sit down at some point
and discuss, um, uh, if the council does want
to bring back hybrid meetings, which we, which we used
to have, and as I think one of the speakers mentioned, um,
when we were using Zoom, which we, which we aren't anymore.
We're using Google meets now.
Um, you know, there is an opportunity
to invite people in only when you want them to speak,
as was discussed that the last council meeting, um,
that still didn't preclude people from coming
and saying hateful things.
And so there's no setup that will stop that
because we have to allow those things to be said,
whether they're in person or on Zoom,
because it's an open public forum
where people can comment on anything on or off the agenda.
So the question really is not, um,
can we prevent those things because we really can't.
The question is, is there a way, uh, maybe
that we can do it better than we have in the past?
And so we, we, we probably will take a look more at
what other communities are doing
when we've looked at it in the past.
We know some require registration, uh,
as was stated last week,
that doesn't prevent people from making up a fake name
and a fake address like they did before.
Um, and, uh, and how do you verify even if they do.
Um, so there's some limitations with that.
But at the end of the day, if, if it is something
that the city council wants to, um, resume, uh, then, um,
we're happy we're, we're willing to,
and happy to work with the mayor on the way to,
uh, to best do that.
Um, I think those are all the questions
that we had for that mayor.
Okay. I don't think I noted anymore.
Um, alright. Yes.
And since you did say that this decision making is kind
of jointly on both of our parts, I, I will say
that I completely appreciate
and value the access that a virtual meeting,
a hybrid meeting will give to more community members.
Um, and I promise that
I will work with Scott to explore any way
that we can do that.
Um, and in the end we may find that the only way
that we can do it is to simply say, we're going
to see what kind of comments we get
and, um, we might have to be a little brave,
but he and I will continue to discuss it.
Thank you. Alright, we're going
to move into public hearings and action.
And I'd like to clerk, excuse me, to please read our
actually one and only item tonight.
Reconsideration of ordinance number 7 25 26 amending
chapter 27 zoning regarding Oceans one 70 LLC,
change of building height, permissions,
and MCC Mill Creek Core First reading pass on
September 2nd, 2025.
Second reading failed on October 21st, 2025.
The motion to reconsider and postpone pass on
November 6th, 2025.
This will require five affirmative votes
and it shall be a roll call vote.
Okay. Um, thank you so much.
I need to do just a little bit
of a procedural preamble here.
So bear with us folks. Um, yes.
At our November 6th meeting, the council voted
to reconsider this item,
and that's why it's before us today.
Uh, the motion to reconsider was made in light
of information that became available only
after our October vote.
We now have some clearer information.
Some of it touches on the project's, climate
and flood resilience, possible shading of Mill Creek Park,
and how the TIFF agreement could support city led,
um, resilience work.
And then we also recognized that there was a need
for clarification even among our council members of
what we are voting on.
We're not voting on a height limit that already exists.
And then finally, when we, um, discussed this in October,
some of our counselors were not satisfied
that we had heard enough from the public about
this proposed change.
And, um, so the reconsideration has allowed us to hear,
give the public a little bit more time to hear more.
So now we're at now, and this evening,
because it's a reconsideration agenda item,
the council has to vote to suspend our regular rules
in order to hear fuller information
and to take public comment.
Got all that. Do we have a motion to suspend the rules?
So moved. Councilor Pride, we have a second. Second.
The motion. Second.
And I think to vote on this, we also have
to do a roll call Vote.
Sorry. It just takes a moment to put it in the system
so I can get the roll call up.
Okay. Counselor Coleman? Yes.
Counselor Matthews? Yes, ma'am. Counselor Pride? Yes.
Counselor Walker? Yes. Counselor West. Yeah.
Excuse me. Yes. Counselor Scott? Yes. And Mayor Tipton?
Yes. Alright.
The motion to suspend the rules passes.
And I think we now need to hear from whomever it is
that is going to start providing us more information.
Great. Thank you, mayor. Um, just briefly, as you noted,
uh, back in September on the first read, uh,
the council approved, uh, uh, the request for, uh,
this change, which, um, effectively and,
and we can talk about more in detail,
but effectively removes the requirement that in order
to get, um, uh, a height bonus, uh, for a project,
parking has to be included in the structure.
Um, and instead says that, um, uh, you can get
that without the parking being,
um, included in the structure.
Um, uh, so council had approved
that first reading on second read in October, um,
after council had made a tweak to it, which,
which required another planning board hearing.
And the planning board again recommended unanimously council
approve the ordinance, the council defeated, uh, or,
or the, um, the matter didn't get five votes
as required on second read to amend the zoning ordinance.
And so, uh,
councilor Tipton had requested a reconsideration,
which you all agreed to at your last meeting.
So we have invited, um, the applicant, uh, in to, uh,
further discuss with council this evening, um, some
of the issues that were raised at the last meeting about
shading of the park, about, uh, sustainability, uh,
resilience concerns, um, et cetera.
Uh, and also just to make sure everyone is clear on what's
being requested, what's currently allowed, et cetera.
And so you'll hear from, uh, the applicant.
We also have, um, our planning director
and our economic development director here.
I know our economic development director will say, um,
a few words on this as well.
Uh, and then we're happy to, along with the, uh, applicant
to answer any sort of questions that council might have
before turning questions, uh, over to the,
OR comments over, uh, to the public.
So without further ado, I invite Casey Prentice,
uh, up and his team.
Good evening everybody. Good to see you all.
Congratulations, you, mayor. Thank you.
Welcome member Scott.
Uh, I'm gonna plug in or attempt to plug in.
Bear with me for just a moment.
Introduce yourself.
Uh, my name is Casey Prentice while I pull this up.
Um, I am, uh, representing one 70 Ocean, uh, LLC.
Um, I run the Prentice organization,
which is a hospitality firm
and a real estate development firm.
Perfect. Uh, thank you all again for the opportunity to, uh,
represent this, this topic.
Um, you have seen me before, if you have heard me
before, uh, but I do appreciate the opportunity to share,
uh, some additional information
and go over some of the concerns that were expressed, um,
at, uh, one of the last council meetings.
Um, I wanted to start with clarifying what this request is
and what this request is not.
This request is a request
to allow higher density housing within
an existing height envelope.
What this request is not is
to add additional building height.
It is also not a request to change any
of the building massing
that is currently approved under the current zoning.
This is really about what fits within the box of air
that is currently allowed to exist.
So it's really a topic of, of trying to maximize the number
of housing units within the allowed building height
and massing out low per the current zoning.
On the left hand side, uh, it shows a, a building that has
a 75 feet of total height
and it has 140, uh, market rate apartments.
There is a ground floor of retail followed by two floors
of parking, uh, with residential units above.
What we are looking to do, uh,
with this zoning tax amendment, um,
is also build a 75 foot building.
So identical building height.
Uh, we are simply looking to remove the two floors
of parking and replace them with two floors
of additional market rate apartments.
This is showing you, uh, different ways
that you can accommodate density, um, depending on floor
to floor heights, uh, a range of uses.
Uh, on the left, uh, we have a potential building
with higher density units, uh, showing 10 foot floor floors.
Um, theoretically on the right hand side you can see, uh,
a potential building with lower unit density, uh,
with 15 foot ceilings.
Uh, there could be, uh, any number of variations of, uh,
floor, floor heights, um, depending on,
on the building's objectives.
As we all know, um, you know,
warehouses have much taller building heights than others.
Retail tend tends to have higher, uh, floor floors than,
uh, office or residential.
Um, so this is really a topic about density.
Uh, this project, um, does align with a lot of the,
the broader city goals.
Um, and I do think that it's worth, uh, reiterating for the,
for the public's benefit
and the, and the councils of course.
Um, some of the ways that this project we feel, um,
matches up with, um, the goals identified in, uh,
the city's planning documents.
Um, mostly, uh, I think we are all aware, uh, the real need
for additional housing units, uh, market rate,
affordable units, um, are a challenge.
There's a supply demand issue in the state of Maine.
Uh, we're estimated to need 40,000 additional housing units.
Um, we think that in this neighborhood,
market rate apartments, uh, for the everyday Joe, uh, is
what this neighborhood would really benefit from.
Um, and we think that it's a, it's a great project.
Um, we're looking to expand more mixed use activity
to activate this area.
Uh, there's seas of surface parking, uh,
in this neighborhood, and I think the, the opportunity
to see this become a really vibrant area of South Portland.
Um, especially with the recession of the main mall area.
Uh, I think this is the city's best opportunity
to really add to the commercial base
and help lower the property taxes unanimously across the,
across the city by diversifying some use
and getting some, some more commercial activity
promoting the walkable transit neighborhood.
Uh, our property is located, uh, immediately adjacent
to, uh, the transit station.
I think it's a real opportunity to highlight, um,
a walkable development that's transit oriented, uh,
that reduces the dependency and,
and the encouragement of single use vehicles, um,
which is another one of the city's goals.
Um, it helps alleviate traffic.
It's better for the environment.
Um, it's better from neighborhood activity,
uh, pedestrian activity.
Um, there's a, a whole host of reasons for that.
Uh, we want to encourage multi-use storied, uh, buildings,
uh, with pedestrian focus to urban environments.
Uh, climate resiliency is top of mind on everybody's list.
Uh, we'd be fools to ignore that.
Um, of course, um, supporting business growth and,
and as I mentioned, adding tax benefits.
There are a lot of, uh, project benefits.
Um, you all are very aware of the benefits of the projects.
Um, as uh, was discussed,
we've been here over the past two years.
Um, the city has been great to work with.
Uh, we've been successful at working together, uh,
to do a TIF credit enhancement agreement
as an economic incentive to do this project, uh,
because it aligns so well, uh, with the city's goals.
Um, so we've been very, um, appreciative
of the collaboration with both this team, uh,
the city council, as well as, uh, the planning staff
and the planning department.
Um, adding, you know, over 200 housing units is a real,
real impact to this neighborhood
and to the businesses that exist here.
Um, and we think it can be a really
attractive thing for the tax base.
That said, we have heard concerns, um,
the overall building resiliency, the, so orientation
and potential shading of the park, building massing
and height and traffic.
So we figured we'd go through each of these quickly for you.
Uh, building resiliency, uh, there's a lot of words on this.
Um, apologies for,
and I promise I won't read it word for word.
Um, this building is specifically cited in an area
that is resilient by base elevation.
Um, in addition to that, um,
sustainability is a core principle of what we do as a firm,
um, on, on our real estate practice.
And a big piece of that is making sure
that occupied housing units are above floor one.
Um, in the event that there was a catastrophic event
that resulted in flooding, um, you don't need to go
to the coffee shop.
Um, it can close.
It's never a good thing, but it can close in the
event it had to.
We look to move all of our building
systems, alpha of the ground floor.
We like to put 'em on the roof if we can.
Uh, whenever we can, um, system resiliency occupied,
space resiliency, uh, that's all top of mind.
What's really interesting about this particular project
and the way that we have structured the tiff with the city,
is that this project actually pays for some
of the improvements that have been proposed to the city
in the past studies to make the
entire neighborhood resilient.
A key area of Mill Creek is actually the, the pond bi.
The pond gives the outflow of storm surge a place to go,
and it, if you build up the, the edges of the pond,
it can capture all of that water
and protect it from overflowing the current banks
and flooding down the rest of the streets.
One example that came forward from the city's, uh, study,
uh, this project in the TIF revenue that is, uh, you know,
coming off of it, um, have been earmarked
by the city's staff to pay for resiliency efforts
for the benefit of the broader community.
So I, I think that it's, it is a real tangible opportunity
for the city to start enacting resiliency plans, uh,
in a meaningful way, which, um,
should really be a focal point
of, of tonight's conversation.
Solar considerations. Um, the park is special.
We all see it in the winter. I think it's one
of my favorite places in southern Maine in the winter.
Um, the, the park is to our south, um, which means
that it will never be in the shade of this building, uh,
no matter how tall the building gets.
Um, simply because, um, as we all know,
this sun rises in the east and sets in the west, um,
and the solar shading will never impact this park, um,
simply because of its site location.
So, uh, we can be assured that this project's, uh,
massing will not have a negative impact to the, to the park
and, and the vibrancy of that park.
It's, it's a special place.
Scale and compatibility, as I previously mentioned, um, we,
we are not talking about tonight is massing or height.
Uh, we're simply talking about
what happens within that box of air.
Um, today we can build 75 feet.
Tomorrow we would be able to build 75 feet.
This is simply about the uses that exist within
that 75 foot allowed envelope,
traffic and transportation.
Um, again, we feel really strongly, um, again,
environmental sustainability, walkability scores,
transit oriented development.
Having parking within buildings is not the smart play.
Um, if you want to walkable community,
centralized parking garages, force people to park,
walk past businesses in order to get to the point
of wherever they're going, their destination.
This is what creates walkable neighborhoods.
It activates retail that allows you to stop
and get that cup of coffee in between your house
and your car when you're getting in your car to go to work.
If all of our buildings have parking within the footprint
of a building, you live in your building,
you get in your car, you drive to the next building,
you get out of your car, you go to your office,
you never engage the street it's in.
And to be frank, I think it's bad policy.
Um, I hope that more communities recognize
that centralized parking models are better, it's better
for transportation, it's better for walkability scores,
it's better for the environment, it's better for traffic.
Um, this site also happens to sit right next to, uh,
the greenway and the transit hub.
It is the best possible spot
to build a high density apartment building
that encourages a diverse, uh, set of,
of transportation options for people.
And then the, the city's stated goals, uh, going back
to 2018, I don't think it would be a surprise to anybody
to see housing, um, as you know, among the top 10, um,
going back every single year, uh, to 2018,
housing is a, is a hot topic.
Uh, we're really excited by it.
There's great market dynamics here.
I think it's a great place to live. This, this neighborhood,
I think is, as I mentioned
before, I think is, has
among the most potential in this entire town.
Um, I think it can be awesome.
Um, I've looked to live over here.
There's not very many options.
Um, we were excited to build markety departments, uh,
and help the city achieve, uh, some
of the balance on the, on the housing.
And then of course, the economic, uh, impacts here.
Um, it's about a 80 to $90 million project.
It's a really meaningful economic
investment into this community.
Uh, with that comes tax benefits.
Um, and the tax benefits can help with every single element
of this city's budget, whether it be education, funding, uh,
all of the tough challenges
that you all face every budget season, uh, more
impactful development like this project will help balance
the budget and allow and allow the city to do the things
that we all want to do on both a, you know, societal level,
educational level, public safety, uh, support all
of the various different town, um,
departments and, and needs.
Uh, so with that, I'm happy
to answer any additional questions. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Hold that thought for one second.
Do we have any other presenting information? Yeah,
We do have our economic development director,
Lee Duffy is gonna say a few words as well.
Milan did, did you feel the need to add anything?
I always want to ask you before we close up. Okay. So, Jeff,
Would you like me to leave this up or fully Yeah,
You can leave that up just in case
there's questions afterwards.
And then let's hear from Leah,
and then we'll turn this over to council for questions.
Thank you. I know this isn't the way it works, but I do.
This is, wait, it, it isn't how it works,
but it's just about the font, please.
Uh, oh, the
World's smallest possible. I,
I apologize that,
can it be available online or something?
Okay. Thanks. Okay.
All right. Well, hello again. Leah Duffy,
economic Development Director.
Um, I just have a couple more points to make,
but it's probably things that you just heard.
I'm gonna say it again. When I speak
to our business community,
a standout concern is the availability
of a qualified workforce.
I hear this over and over again across many
different types of businesses.
This issue is exacerbated by the lack
of housing in South Portland,
allowing more habitable floors within the same building.
Height can offer 208 residential units instead
of a hundred and forty, sixty eight more needed homes.
This will make meaningful progress towards the city's
housing production goals.
In my conversations with small businesses, restaurants,
shops, services in this area, they're excited
by the potential increase in their customer base.
More people living walking distance
to their businesses will certainly be beneficial,
especially in our low winter season when our small
businesses truly do struggle.
This is the type of growth that was supported
by the Mill Creek Master Plan, which strives
to transition from prevalence of strip malls
to more walkable, transit oriented
and mixed use environment.
The master plan was adopted in 2015. Progress has been slow.
I know some concern has been raised about the potential
for a sharp increase in the pace
of development on adjacent parcels
In my previous profession.
As an architect, I know that redevelopment
and commercial cores is extremely intricate.
Retail plazas represent a complex web
of fragmented property ownership
and approval rights across various entities,
including anchor stores, perimeter pad buildings,
and existing retail leases.
Redevelopment will take years of planning
and public-private collaboration.
One 70 Ocean will hopefully be a catalyst
for positive progress towards the master plan goals
for the long term.
Finally, contributing additional tax revenue.
This project will help alleviate the burden on our single
family residential tax base.
During the years the project is sheltered.
Within TIF district, new tax dollars will be available
for a variety of uses, including public safety,
infrastructure and facilities.
We need to grow our overall tax base
with big moves like this project
to make a meaningful impact towards stabilizing property
taxes in the community.
Thank you.
Thank you. And, alright, so
what we're going to do is give counsel time for questions.
Then we'll take public comment on the item.
Then council will have a discussion
and who knows what may happen after that,
but we are supposed to vote.
Okay. Councilors, do you have questions
for either of the presenters? Councilor West?
I, I have questions about parking
and it's the, um, the planning director
that could answer those questions.
So even though he didn't speak, can I ask my questions?
Yeah. Alright.
So the proposal that was laid out
in their application in
August 25th, 2025,
said 124 living units
and 124 parking spaces.
Now they want 200
and 208 units
with 96 studios, 94 1 bedrooms
and 18 two bedrooms.
So what is the parking requirement
for this current ask?
Um, me, the planning director.
Um, thank you for the question.
This, this is a little bit of a longer answer
because there's many facets
that feed into the parking thing.
The simplest answer is if we look at our parking schedule,
section 1556 of our zoning ordinance, 208 units
with the split of units that they propose would lead
to a cold 193 spaces, uh, of required parking.
If it was the 140 units that we heard earlier be 134 spaces,
it was 124 units, I think that you were reading from the,
uh, earlier material.
It's gonna be somewhere a little less than 130 spaces.
Uh, I can give you the detail,
but to get to the punch line at the end,
there is shared parking that our ordinance recognizes
and we use routinely.
Compact parking spaces will reduce the physical footprint
of the area for parking.
Um, you can do an offset for bicycle parking.
Um, and within the, um, more urbanized compact areas,
we do recognize a, uh, up to 50% reduction at the discretion
of the planning board when they receive sufficient support
to say, this is the reason why we can justify a,
a reduction in parking if we were to factor in all
of those combined reductions.
Um, at the 208 units that's currently being discussed,
it drops to somewhere between 80
and 193 spaces, uh,
as the requirement 80 is on the very low end,
if you maximize all of those possible available reductions,
uh, including using shared parking offsite.
So how much land is required for 193 spaces,
and on the low side, 83 spaces,
It's between 13,000 and around 31,000 square feet.
Um, so for comparison, I think I shared
with you all at the first reading,
or it was the second reading that, uh, failed last time.
Um, what we understand from the applicant,
it's still being reviewed in the site plan, is
that they secured an option
or maybe even as far as a lease, um,
on the immediately adjacent property where m
and t bank is with the expectation that they would bring m
and t into the ground floor retail office units
that they intend to build,
and then leave that space open for development.
That property is around 32,000 square feet.
Um, and I also understand, I think
that they're looking at shared parking at the, uh,
adjacent Plaza Milk Creek Plaza, uh, right next door.
So between those two spaces, um, they have more than enough
that they would be able to meet the surface parking demand
with existing surface parking.
Um, it's the, it's the land use of today,
which is be allowed to be activated for these uses instead
of the low density office uses that are generally there.
Thank you.
Okay. Councilor Scott,
Can I ask a a follow up to that, that,
that the parking considerations
that you just outlined would be a part
of the planning board's consideration?
Is it planning board consideration of the, of the proposal?
Yes. Yes.
Yeah. Um, there are some aspects to this.
For instance, the, um, if there's an option to lease
or a discussion or a, if it goes so far as a purchase
and sale agreement, we can operate under those terms
as well with the planning board.
But you would always, at a bare minimum, have a condition
that before any building permits are issued,
before any shovels hit the ground
before anything real, uh,
that puts us into a snowball effect of having to, whoa,
now we built a building, but we never got
that parking confirmed, and now we're stuck in a hard place.
We just don't put ourselves in that situation.
So you may see a planning board condition
that requires the legal verification
that they have those rights in perpetuity
and should, for instance, a license agreement fall apart,
that they have an alternative in place.
So the planning board expects to see all those,
and then those are verified through the city, uh,
and if there are legal documents,
they run through corporation Council.
Thank you. More questions, councilor Matthews
Mil. So if
what you're saying is if we were to go ahead
and approve this project tonight, right.
Let's hypothetically we approve it.
We don't have to hear about this again, right?
No, seriously. I'm, I'm being serious.
You're not gonna bring this pocket back to us again. Right.
Because over the last year
and a half, I've heard enough of one 70 Ocean Street,
Leah may do a spotlight on new development in the city,
but other than that, if it's built, I don't suspect
There's any. All right. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, counselor. Matthews more questions
from our
counselors? Yes, counselor.
I, I think this might be a question for Casey,
but you might, sorry.
Sure. You might knock it off so quickly.
Um, for either of you, can you describe the Department
of Transportation application
that you submitted some of that process?
And I think my related question is around, you know, that
that analysis would happen for the building
to come into fruition,
but then also there is tiff money
that could potentially support additional infrastructure
and improvements in the area is not sort of a condition
of the building coming to fruition.
I'm not using the right words, but I, I just would like
to understand more about the traffic issue
as it's been brought up by presidents.
Um, if I tackle the process
and how the DOT permits work within our development review
protocol, uh, I can cover that piece.
And then where the status of their applications are,
I think it's probably best for them to, that'd be great.
Is that fair? Thank you. Um, all right.
So the, the process for A DOT, uh,
traffic movement permit kicks in when a project generates
enough trips at the peak hour, uh,
which is when everyone feels the stress when there's
vehicles at the intersections.
Um, and so that's why they use
that threshold is a 99 trips per, um,
or at the peak hour that a trip
that requirement for A DOT permit.
This project is of that scale that requires it.
Um, so even without that 99 trip, um,
trips generated, the city has regulations that mirror a lot
of what DOT requests.
And so we do this process anyway, just so you know,
if it comes in at 98 trips, we're still going
through a pretty rigorous process.
Just the state doesn't have to approve it.
Uh, the state's process is that you first submit, um,
it's almost like listed like chapters.
You submit chapters one through five or six, I believe,
and that's basically setting the conditions.
It's the analysis of the entire street network, um, all
of the problems in the network, all the safety issues,
all the documented evidence that's there.
And then also a full description of the project.
We go through an initial scoping meeting with DOT,
the cities involved, and any other jurisdictions
that can be impacted,
because once the hard car hits the road,
it's gonna hit intersections that go beyond our boundaries.
Uh, in this case, at a minimum,
I expect Portland would be at the table for that
because they cross the bridge.
Um, all of those parties sit together
and we lay out what our needs are to understand, um,
the information that's necessary for us
to make decisions about whether the parking solution
is adequate for a project.
Uh, and so first it's just, what information do we need?
Then they respond to all those informational needs.
If there's gaps in the initial analysis that they provide,
there's always gaps.
There's always additional information.
Once that's settled, we have another meeting
and we verify, okay, fine.
We now understand the project and its environment
and the work road conditions.
We have enough information on what are the solutions
to the known problems that this parking, uh,
or this project is generating.
And we have subsequent meetings
to figure out those solutions.
And it's sort of an iterative process until we get
to the point where we have an identified set of problems.
If there are problems and an appropriate sized intervention,
uh, for the project to implement, um,
the city can participate in some of those discussions.
Um, the, this is maybe more for Scott to weigh in on, on
how we, uh, usually use TIFF money.
Um, but it's my understanding that the city looks
for the TIFF to be additive
and not carry the water that the developer has to, has to do
for their project to be viable.
So, for instance, if there was, um, an intersection upgrade
that had to happen in order for the projects trips to be,
uh, functional within our street grid without creating major
congestion problems, the city may also take that opportunity
to layer on TIFF buns to do beautification at
that same intersection or enhance bicycle
and pedestrian improvements
or something else that builds on.
Um, but we wouldn't be using TIFF money
to do something that they're obligated
To be doing.
Um, so that's process.
And then that all has to be done and resolved.
So we understand the scope of those impacts when it goes
to the planning board, um, so that they understand
what the implications are for the project.
If there's downstream impacts from the project
because of transportation issues, then that has
to be baked into the review of the project.
Um, if there's, you know, whole acquisitions of right
of way, that's the only way
that this project is gonna be viable.
We need to consider that as part of,
'cause that's also land disturbance and impacts properties.
Um, typically projects work within right of way.
And so it's not often that the site plan for the project has
to be modified in order to account
for transportation improvements.
Uh, think of things like signal upgrades or whatnot.
It's kind of invisible, but it makes it function better.
So hopefully that kind of explains process
and where the planning board sits in.
Thank you.
Good evening. Uh, Casey Prince again.
Um, we, uh, we applied for our MDOT permit
after the first city council, uh,
meeting when we got the unanimous vote,
um, from that first meeting.
Um, we have since, uh,
put it on pause while we go through this second round.
Um, it is, uh, as Milan was just going over
before, we have our site plan approval, uh,
or site plan meeting with the planning board.
Uh, we need to understand
what the MDOT traffic impacts are going to be for,
for offsite improvements, um, so that we can have that, uh,
as part of the conversation with the planning board.
Uh, the, that is typically the,
the long pole in the tent, so to speak.
Um, so we, uh, we applied for that first.
It does require a number of units, men, you know,
massing density in order to do those calculations.
Um, so we had submitted previously, uh, the 208 units, uh,
based on, on that first vote, um, that is all ready to go,
uh, at MDOT.
Uh, but for the pause, uh, that we initiated, when we get,
uh, council guidance here, um, we will reinitiate
that conversation with MDOT.
Um, hopefully not have to amend it,
uh, if tonight goes well.
Um, and then we can pick that back up.
Uh, and then when that is complete, uh, we can bring it
to the planning board, um, as part of the consideration for,
uh, the building itself, uh, rather than the zoning, uh,
which is what we're talking about tonight.
So there'll be a process with the planning board
to review all of the things that Milan just went over.
Uh, so currently it is, uh, at MDOT waiting
for us to tell them what to do.
And, sorry, may I ask a very quick follow up?
Yes, you may. Is there a study that you need to present
as sort of your proposed impacts,
or do, do you present the project
and the DOT provides you feedback?
Like do you have a sense of what you would might need to do?
Um, I'll look to my technical team over here.
Um, I don't believe, uh,
that the MDOT requires much from us.
Uh, we do have a traffic engineer that provides, uh, the,
and fills out that traffic movement permit
and all of the MDOT stuff on our behalf.
Um, and, um, and, and then it goes into MDOT court.
I'm not exactly sure what happens from there. That's fine.
Other than the, uh, MDOT doing MDOT things.
Perfect. Good luck to them. Thank
You On that.
I'm just curious if there's sort of a,
sometimes the developer has to kind of put a study
or sort of a, this is the impacts
that we think based on your guidance
and we understand what might need to happen as opposed
to putting in an application
and getting feedback back from a study that's done by the,
you know, AJ or whatever.
So I just wasn't sure
how much you present versus receive in terms
of those potential impacts to traffic.
Typically, the applicant's traffic engineer develops the
whole, uh, description of def of issues
and the proposed solutions Okay.
And advocates that these are solutions
that are appropriate to the problem.
We all agreed that exists. Okay. Um, thank you.
The DOT though has their own team of traffic engineers,
and they'll validate whether
that solution actually does make sense.
Uh, and they're obviously often saying, well, you know, you,
you want a little light on this, we expect
to see such and such happen.
Um, it's not often that I'm in those meetings
and, you know, DOT's mentioning something
and the traffic engineer has
no idea where they're coming from.
It's just that DOT just has better visibility on
where the breakdowns in the system are.
Uh, the one thing, if I can just add
to my prior comment about the use of TIF funds projects have
to account for the new problem that they create,
not existing problems in the system
that might already be there,
that they are also going to be subject to.
Um, so if we have an intersection that's graded, not great,
um, and this project comes in and we analyze its trips, uh,
and how many trips it'll put on that intersection,
it may not, the project may not create a scenario where
that intersection substantially changes in its condition.
Mm-hmm. Maybe because most
of the people are going the other direction
and they'll stress a different intersection,
they'll have to deal with that intersection.
Um, but the city's still left with a problem intersection
that it always had from historical growth.
That's where TIFF can really be an additive thing,
which benefits not just the project,
but the community generally.
Um, so while the DOT permit won't trigger fixes to things
that the project didn't cause,
it can help alleviate those through the tiff. That's
Helpful. Thank you.
Thank you both.
Thank you. And thank you Councilor Scott.
Interesting questions. Anyone else?
Alright, if there is no more questions from our counselors
at this time, we're going
to open the item up for public comment.
Is there anyone who would like
to make public comment on this item?
Hello, my name's Ryan Hamilton.
I live on, uh, LUT Field Road in South Portland,
and I am a member of the, uh,
economic development Committee.
I would like to just express my support
for the project at one 70 Ocean.
Um, I think that, uh,
the presenters here tonight have made a very clear case for,
you know, why this is a beneficial
project for the community.
Um, I believe in, uh, developing, uh, community
and a city around people
and not necessarily, you know, cars.
Um, so I, I I think that there are, you know,
adequate provisions made for, you know,
parking considerations, especially given the amount
of empty asphalt that we have, um, here in this, uh,
in this Mill Creek park area.
Um, you know, workforce, uh,
development is obviously very important
for the community right now.
And as well as taxes, um,
and the tax burden on commercial versus residential, I think
that, uh, you know, having dense housing here in this part
of the community really, um, encourages car free living,
encourages people to live and work in,
in within walking distance.
Um, you know, I'm a big proponent of the 15 minute city, um,
and this really fits in well with that as well as the,
the overall city's comprehensive plan.
Um, walkability access to the ET outdoors activities
and local businesses, um, are all really in strong alignment
with this, uh, with this project.
Um, so, uh, in addition to that, um, you know,
it opens the door to the right kind
of development more broadly.
Um, if you know other developers
who are interested in investing in this, in the city, um,
see that the, the city and
and leadership at the city are open to
and willing to, um, you know, allow these types
of projects in this scale of development, then I, I think
that opens the div the door for more of this type
of development, which is, uh,
a great thing for the community. That's all. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Any other public comment?
Hi everyone. My name is K Cormier.
I live on 16 Moser Street.
This is also my first city council meeting.
So thank you all for your, your work here.
Um, I just wanna express support.
Um, I believe that we should increase the density allowable
for housing here in South Portland.
This dense apartment style is good for the environment,
for the people and for the city.
This apartment style, which maximizes the number
of residential spaces, benefits the environment greatly
because this would provide housing to folks close
to amenities including grocery stores, public transit
and active transportation networks like the Greenbelt.
This could also provide local housing for people
who work in downtown South Portland,
reducing car commutes into the area.
I've recently been in the shoes
of apartment hunting in this area, and it is no easy task.
Um, it's extremely competitive
and there are not many available apartments.
Anything that the city can do to increase the number
of apartments in this area would be greatly appreciated.
I believe it's in the city's best interest to help the folks
who want to work and live in this area.
Thank you so much for your time.
Thank you very much. Anyone else?
Public comment is open on this item.
Hi, uh, my name is Fitz Kramer.
I live on Broadway and echoing, uh, what others have said,
I also just wanted to speak in favor
of the zoning text amendment for one 70 Ocean.
I think that providing this much stents housing with access
to both the transit hub and the green belt is a great idea,
and it also sounds like a promising way
to make the Mill Creek neighborhood more walkable
and create more space for local businesses
in a desirable location.
So I just wanted to voice my support. Thank
You. Thank you
very much. Anyone else?
Yes, you are, because this is a different topic.
I thought so, but I wanted
to make sure Carly Williams on Hall Street again, um,
thank you for the very thorough presentation,
and I think it was very compelling around the alignment
with the city's priorities.
Um, and I totally agree it's very hard
to find rental housing, and so more dense housing, um,
and workforce development in place for people
to live is a great, um, great sell.
Um, I did notice that the term
that you used in your presentation was affordable market
rate, which does seem like a bit of a oxymoron.
Um, given that the current housing climate,
the current market rate
for a one bedroom apartment in South Portland, according
to zillow.com is $1,800.
Um, and so I totally understand
that the topic tonight is really focused on the parking
and, um, what's in the box of air.
Um, however, I, you know,
and I, I am jumping into this conversation
and so I apologize for that.
But, um, I'm curious about the affordable housing
conversations that have happened around this unit
and if the council
or developer has considered the inclusion
of affordable housing units within the building.
And also if there's a plan to use the TIF funds
to support affordable housing within
South Portland, if that's allowed.
I don't, I don't know. Um, I also, um,
was reading online a bit
and it says that with more housing units
reducing the overall cost of developing, um,
it reduces the overall cost
of developing housing units within the footprint
of the developable lot developable lot.
Um, and so I'm curious if you could share if there's any
breakdown between the affordable
and market rate housing in the plan on the proposal.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Do we have additional public comment? Yes, please.
Uh, rose Marie DeAngelos Pleasantdale, I wanted
to just stand to quickly give my support for this project.
Uh, several of the last speakers really said all the points
that I would make, so I don't need to reiterate them.
It's clear we need more housing
and yes, we do need more affordable housing
and I hope that that happens soon as well.
Um, I wanna give support in general for more housing
and certainly workforce housing,
but the last speaker said something
that I think is also really important
and, um, while housing is important,
and we do need more of it in general, housing
and rental property is really expensive in the city.
And I would just ask that as we move forward
that the council consider revisiting
its rent control issues that, um, it has said in the past
at, I understand that if a, if a,
a landlord owns more than 12 rental units,
that there's a limit of 10%, 10% is a really high number.
And, um, so as we look at this project
and hopefully approve it, I just think that going forward,
looking at how we manage rent control, uh,
is a really important topic that I hope gets revisited.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Do we have anyone else who would like
to make a comment?
Come on down. Thank you.
Yeah. Uh, Andrew Stevens.
I'm at, uh, 19 Minutes Street here in South Portland.
I also wanna give my support for this project.
Um, I've been fortunate to work in the architecture
and construction industry for the last 16 years,
and am a proponent of a lot of the topics
that have been brought up and points today about walkable
cities density.
Um, this area of South Portland is, you know, prime location
for density and housing to occur.
It's located to a lot of key, um, key locations
that people wanna be able to walk to, parks, schools,
other restaurants and amenities that we have here.
Uh, I've also been fortunate to work on projects that are
of the scale that have not been able to go forward
because of issues that have happened in the past
with affordability of products and labor.
And so I think it's important to give developers, uh,
opportunities to get more density into projects like this so
that they can continue to make the project viable
and bring it to fruition.
So, uh, I support a,
a yes vote on the added density
for this project. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Thank you. Come on. Come on everybody.
Counselors, Jeff
Steinbrink, cottage Road.
I am not everybody. Um, so there,
there's been kind of a sea change it seems
to me over the course of our conversations
about this building.
And, uh, I'm, I suppose I'm happy to see that.
Um, I've got a really,
maybe I have three homely comments to make.
One I'm sure is homely.
Um, through all of this,
I think we would've been well served by a model,
by a physical thing that we could actually look at
and would help us imagine how the shadows were gonna fall
and to what extent this did
or did not impose itself on our neighborhoods rather than
or perhaps integrate, uh, handsomely with them.
So in the future, we might just think about that,
and I don't think it has to be elaborate or expensive.
Uh, maybe just a few boxes of foam on a pad would do it.
But we have been talking a lot lately,
not just in this context of this project, about walkability,
about the notion of a campus
city center kind of place.
And it does make me, uh, wonder about the early days
of talking about this project when it seemed to me
that the problem was a kind of a sore thumb issue.
How is this thing going to integrate with the city
and how is it gonna fit into the space box of air now
that we're imagining?
And the thing that I think we should have been conscious
of from the beginning was the extent
to which I think architects call it the conversation
between the building we're talking about
and the structures around it and the city generally.
I'm not sure what that conversation is like
in the case of this building.
I don't think we've heard much tonight about the nature of
that conversation, but it does seem to me we, we have,
when we talk a little bit in about anyway, about
where people park and about how people get around, uh,
wherever they park and about the way in which the building
does or does not, uh, welcome itself in the context
of the place where we're talking about putting, it
does occur to me though that we do have, uh,
an extraordinary architecture
to talk about in South Portland, and we haven't.
So we've got Mahoney, for instance,
and now is a kind of acknowledged signature building, uh,
which has its own vocabulary to lend to a project like this.
But more than that, we've got the architecture
of South Portland's 30 seconds neighborhoods, the places
where we live, and that each in their own way contribute
to the way we imagine the con the context we live in.
And it seems to me that I don't know that the extent
to which that conversation's been entered into
by this building.
I'd just like to see more of it. Thank you.
Anyone else? Alright.
Is there anything online? Anyone online? Anyone
On Zoom? Please raise
your hand. I don't see
any, no hands on Zoom.
Okay. Well then we are going to close public comment
and ask what is the will of our council at this questions?
Pardon? He had some questions, I think.
Oh, thank you very much. Yes, thank you. Um, Mr.
City manager, there were some questions asked.
So I'm gonna have, um, Casey come up to discuss
what is meant by affordable market rates since
that was the term that was used,
and kind of recap some of the prior, prior discussions
that we've had, um, um, at council meeting
and at the staff level about that.
But before we do, um, I did want
to confirm there was a question from the speaker about
whether or not TIF funds could
be used for affordable housing.
The answer is yes, and we have done it, um, uh,
in the past as well.
Um, so, so absolutely that's one of, uh,
several uses that, uh, TIF funds.
They're limited. You can't use them like regular tax dollars
where it can be used for just about anything allowed under
the Constitution.
Um, it's a, it's a narrower field,
but that's why you get the benefit
of the TIF for all those other reasons.
But, uh, affordable housing is one of them.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um, we are building a market rate apartment building.
Uh, so when I say affordable and,
and what we talk about a lot is lowercase
a versus a capital A.
Uh, capital A would be a Section eight, a housing product
where there is, uh, income restrictions
where if you make more than a certain dollar amount, uh,
you are not able to apply for a housing unit.
Uh, we are not looking to do a
section eight housing project.
Uh, we're looking to do a lowercase affordable, um,
10 ways that we do that.
We do it through unit mix.
Uh, we want, uh, affordable through studios,
through one bedrooms, through efficient layouts
where the gross dollar amounts of your monthly rent, um, is
as affordable as can be.
Um, apartments are very expensive right now.
Um, it's a, it's a national issue. It's a main issue.
Um, building materials are very expensive right now.
Uh, they're very expensive to build.
Uh, it is a much, we could have a whole dialogue on
affordability within, uh, the housing, uh, space.
Um, but our goal is to build true workforce housing.
We want people, I'm in the restaurant business.
We, we own a variety of restaurants.
Um, we house many of the people that work for me
because it is unaffordable
to live in the greater Portland area.
Um, workforce housing is a very important thing, uh,
for the vibrancy of and continue to growth
and development of this area.
Um, it is workforce housing.
My, my employees in our restaurants would make more than,
uh, they'd be allowed
to if they were in a subsidized capital,
a affordable housing, uh, building.
But they are not rich.
They are looking for just good workforce housing,
police officers, firefighters, everyday people.
Um, that's what we're looking to build.
Uh, and you can do it through a
variety of different techniques.
Finishes, um, efficiency of layouts, trying to maximize the,
the number of units per per floor.
Um, it's all about trying to maximize, uh,
the revenue opportunity within the walls so
that you can have them be as affordable as possible.
Thank you. You didn't note any other questions? Yep. Okay.
Well now I'm going to ask what is the will
of our council wish?
Will, I'll
Get straight so the motion's still on the floor.
Wait, The, the motion's already on the floor
because a motion for
reconsideration. Put it right in front of us. Oh,
Sorry. So we don't need to make a
motion. That's true. Thank you.
Alright. Um, you were so right about that.
Alright, we are, since we're back in time to when
council was going to discuss, um,
I don't need to get a motion.
So anyone have some comments?
Real? Yeah. Councilor Walker.
Councilor Walker's got her
Hand. Okay. Counselor
Walker, we see you.
Hello. Um, I will be supporting this, the reconsideration,
um, and the zoning amendment,
amendment for multiple reasons.
But the first thing I wanna say is how heartened I am to see
so many people come forward, um, spend their time
and their hard earned dollars to be a part
of this council meeting tonight
and to weigh in, in support of this project.
Um, I know one of the concerns ongoing since October was
that we felt like we weren't maybe hearing adequately from,
um, residents of South Portland about this project.
And it was, it was really heartening, um, for you all
to take the time to come forward and speak.
So thank you for that. Um, secondly, just in terms
of the presentation, I mean, I, I jotted down some notes
and the need for more housing, the ability
to expand mixed use activity, um, to promote walkability
and to encourage multiuse buildings.
I mean, as Mr. Francis said, it's, it's all in alignment
with our, our, um, council goals that we've had
for, for several years.
Um, even predating my council, um, council work.
Um, the other thing that I would wanted
to mention is we hear two things over
and over again from our residents, which is please, please,
please lower our taxes and please, please, please figure out
how to have more housing.
Um, and I feel like this project definitely ticks off the
second month in terms of adding more housing units, um,
which could help create flexibility in terms of the way
that people move through the different housing types
that we have in our community.
Um, and then also increases potentially the commercial tax
base by allowing more businesses.
Um, and again, as we add to the residency
of the Mill Creek area, that, you know, if you build it,
they will come kind of mentality.
You may see more businesses moving into the area
as there are more people there to, you know,
use those businesses and use those services.
So I, I think this is a good
project then I'll be supporting it.
Thank you Counselor Walker.
I'm happy to go next if you want,
unless somebody's chomping at the bit.
Uh, anyone chomping? I your hand had been up.
It was, go ahead
Please. Counselor
Scott. No, you're on Counselor Scott. You're on.
Um, well, I, uh,
remember sitting at the November 6th meeting when this got
reconsidered and tabled to December 9th, um,
which was a little daunting at first,
but I'm actually very happy to be sitting, uh,
in this chair now and, and reviewing this.
Um, I do think to clarify some of the confusion around this,
this does appear to be really a parking
consideration change in terms of the zoning text amendment,
and I think has the support of the planning board
and the planning department.
Um, parking to me is sort of, I think the biggest
hangup for me.
Um, and I do want to see less
and less, and hopefully at some point, no surface parking,
love to see no cars, but that's a ways away.
Um, I have driven across this area for 20 years now,
and I have always been amazed at
how many empty parking spaces on the surface there are in
the city, in the downtown area of South Portland.
So while I am concerned with parking
and understand that that was considered as part
of the broader Mill Creek master plan,
I think we are very far from the inflection point
of it being an issue
and that it makes sense to
move development forward as we have tried.
That was a 2015 development plan,
and I believe that nothing has been built in this zone
since that plan was, um, in effect.
So I support the project.
I think we do need to talk about parking, um,
generally across this area as we continue to develop,
but I think that that may be a five to 10 year problem
and not a 2025 problem.
Um, and I appreciate that this project has a long history
of the council, which I have not been a part of.
Um, but I think it makes sense to allow this
to move forward, make the zoning change,
and not have them come
before you again, if that is your desire.
So, um, yeah,
and I also appreciate that folks have have stood up
and, and been for this.
I think that that's very challenging.
It's very easy to be against something.
Um, it's challenging to stand up and be for something,
and I appreciate the comments there.
I also appreciate the comments about affordable housing.
Um, I have been in development for 20 years.
Part of that being affordable housing, part
of it being renewable energy.
Uh, I'm glad we don't have to deal
with the transportation plan for wind turbine blades.
Um, but I think there is a lot of affordable capital,
a affordable housing in South Portland
and in the Portland area.
I think we need to encourage more of it.
I'm very glad that the South Portland Housing Authority, um,
was able to do the expansion on the Betsy Ross house.
And we should continue that.
We also need housing in the middle. We need housing.
We don't need rich housing. We need,
we need more housing stock.
Um, and I think this is, um, a great example
of infill development that I think a lot
of people have been interested in seeing in Mill Creek.
Most of the people that I've talked
to have been excited about this project.
I realize that there are some people
who are concerned about the size,
but I think we need to move forward.
So I would encourage the council to take a deep breath,
help South Portland grow, Move for passage.
Thank you.
Okay. Count. Well count someone else. Start
Misha. I mean, mostly
I, I just uplift
what my fellow counselors have said.
Um, I've been for this project from the beginning
and was a yvo last time.
Um, and I, I appreciate
that there's more support from the public for it.
Um, I think that, you know, really,
I agree we need more housing.
I mean, ultimately all housing is housing.
Um, and even with our rental, um, cost problem, you know,
if you have more inventory,
more more inventory can help with that.
I mean, it's the only thing that can really slow it down at
the very least because I think everybody knows rents are
just gonna go up every year.
But if you have more inventory, you have more choices
and uh, hopefully that can slow the increase of rent
to some degree.
But also, you know,
as we just saw in those slides at the beginning
of this meeting, uh, commercial values are not keeping pace
with the residential values.
And if this project can increase
the commercial values in the surrounding, um, stores
and whatnot in the, in the surrounding
properties, then great.
Because if we can see some of that at least keep pace,
we won't see this continual burden shift
that has been very frustrating for all of us,
um, in the city.
So, uh, for those reasons, uh, and obvious
and the environmental and density reasons
I support this project.
Thank you councilor. Wes,
I think there are a few facts that do need to be reviewed
because you really cannot divorce this project
from the terms of the TIFF deal.
And when people stand up
and talk about the way it's gonna increase our tax base,
the deal that the city entered
with this developer gives the developer a credit of 50%
of the property taxes for the next 30 years.
And at that time, when we agreed to that deal,
the developer was telling us
that they were gonna build 124 units
and put the housing on site.
The reason that the Mill Creek master plan,
it allows five units, five stories as a matter of right,
or seven with parking,
because what it's trying has tried to do
is have more dense development
where we don't have these big empty parking areas.
And the problem that I have, it goes back to the tiff.
I I think the city, we have a,
we have a TIFF district here,
but it only lasts for 12 years.
So after 12 years,
we would've gotten all the property taxes.
But this developer came in
and wanted a separate TIF district
and said they needed the 30 years
and the 50% rebate in the form
of a credit enhancement agreement.
And we agreed to it, we agreed to that
because they told us
that this project requires no zoning amendments
and is in line with the city's Mill Creek master plan.
So I think we've been misled
because now we're gonna have seven stories of residential
and a lot of surface parking that we've been trying
to get away from.
As a matter of policy over the last 10 years,
we were also told there were gonna be 124 units
and now there's gonna be 208 units,
which is a two third percent, uh,
67% increase in the number of units
and associated density of traffic.
So it's a really problematic issue for me,
but I also think that people kind of get the government
that they stand up for.
And I find it absolutely amazing that we have had dozens
and dozens of people criticize us for
allowing housing, proposing that we could have housing
in some areas of our community
where they're not any existing neighborhoods.
And where the, I'm talking about the
eastern waterfront area.
We have hundreds of people show up and yell and send emails,
and not one single person has stood up in a meeting here
and opposed this project.
So when you see a seven story building there, everybody,
and when there's traffic problems
and when you can't see the Christmas lights next year
because of the height of the building
and when we don't get the property tax revenues
that we deserve from a project like this, I, I'm sorry,
but that's, that's just the way it happened
because not enough of you got involved and made and,
and understood about the project and made your views heard.
Yeah, that's it. Thank you Councilor. Councilor
Matthews. I'd like to
see if the city manager
or the assistant city manager would like to defend
or explain the, uh, tiff, uh, problem
that, uh, councilor West just brought forward.
So just, I just wanna say one thing, which is yes,
I think we need to hear from you.
And to be clear,
we are not having debate on the renegotiation of the tiff,
but let's hear from you. Yeah.
And Milan and Josh
or feel, can feel free to weigh in at the time.
Um, the project was more in the, um,
I don't wanna call it conceptual phase,
but it was at a higher level.
And as Council West pointed out,
there were different numbers that were used, um, uh,
for a total number of units.
We did create the TIFF so that there was flexibility
or we tried to, so that there,
that we weren't locked into that number.
Um, as, as we discussed,
because we knew the plan, um, would change.
We didn't at the time understand that there would be, uh,
a difference in taking the parking out or not.
But there's nothing in the TIF that says there has
to be parking there or else you can't, um, you can't get it.
So it'll really be up for the council to decide whether
or not you feel this has changed materially enough
where you would vote against it
because you don't think it, it lives up to the,
to the spirit of, of the tiff.
Um, and,
and Josh, you probably,
since you've dealt more in the negotiations on it,
you can add, uh, some little amplification to that
Josh, assistant city manager.
So with any tiff, when we're pursuing it, one of the
exercises we like to go through is to, um, look at the,
but for analysis,
because oftentimes the reason you do a credit enhancement
agreement is because the numbers don't quite work.
The pro forma doesn't work that there needs
to be an incentive to induce the development that
otherwise wouldn't happen.
And it's challenging to do that.
Um, I, the information
that we saw last year was pretty compelling that,
but for the TIF arrangement, um,
the development would not be able to occur.
And even subsequent to the TIF being adopted,
once they started getting into a higher level of detail
with the project and looking at the cost
of structured parking within the building, there,
there were concerns I know from the development team whether
they could actually pull it off.
And so one could potentially argue that even
what we had given them originally wouldn't have been enough
to make the project work.
Um, the reason that we ended up at the 50%,
and it's a, it's an amount that's quite common,
you'll see in a lot of tip arrangements throughout the state
is because, um, what you're doing in a, in a,
a tax increment financing arrangement is you're drawing a
boundary around a district.
And what it does essentially freezes the current property
value so that when new incremental value gets created,
the new tax dollars that be paid on it,
the municipality gets to shelter
and keep a hundred percent of those dollars
without a a TIF arrangement.
What normally happens with any development is
that you'd see property value go up.
The municipality as a whole, our
relative valuation would be going up,
therefore, relative to our peer communities,
we would be relatively modestly,
but relatively more affluent.
And that changes a whole host of funding formulas at the,
both at the county level
and at the state level, where municipalities that
with higher valuations get less education subsidy.
Um, we are, we're required
to pay more in a county assessment, uh, you know,
if you have more, more valuation.
And so we've done the, the analysis in recent years,
and for every new dollar of value
that gets created in the community outside of TIF district,
we're really, we are realizing about 50% of the,
of the value of that.
And so, um, one can make the argument
that if you put new investment within a TIF district
that gets sheltered,
even if you give a 50% credit enhancement reimbursement
to the developer, that's as much as you
otherwise would've lost in less education subsidy
and higher county taxes and everything anyway.
And you, you'd still be able to retain the 50%
of the value that you would preserve.
And, um, it, it's not as, as precise as that,
but I mean that's, that's generally, uh, a rule of thumb
that communities look at that.
And so the average of the 50% over the 30 years was meant
to more or less match that.
Um, Casey wants to, I, yes,
but I'm not sure that's what we're gonna do.
Um, I I think that
satisfies for now.
Yes. I mean, the developer is saying
that he has a contribution to make on this topic,
but I think, I think we're just gonna stop to council.
Yeah, we're fine. Leave it where it is. Yeah.
Um, did you want to make any comment, councilor Coleman?
I actually wanted to hear what Casey had to say.
I'm sorry, but I can allow it
by unanimous consent if there's no,
do we have unanimous consent to hear what Casey has to say
regarding the TIFF agreement?
I don't see any objections. Come on back.
Thank you all. Um,
and just to help also clarify some, some
of the history I do, I feel like it's important.
Um, the, the tip was put in place with a mandate
that if I did not build a minimum of 124 housing units,
I would not receive the tiff.
The 124 units was a minimum.
Uh, we were actually quite pleased to be able
to offer more housing units
through additional design development.
Um, we, we thought that that would be a,
a well received change, um, by the town.
Um, so I, I do want to state that our objective in working
with the city, uh, was to identify as many housing units
as we could, and certainly not less than 124.
Um, I think that's a really important
element to put out there.
Uh, the other reason for the, the TIFF
and the credit enhancement agreement, uh,
is inten is intended to incentivize market rate apartments.
Um, we all see the housing developments
that are being built in southern Maine.
Uh, there's a lot of condos for sale product,
and then there's a lot of capital a affordable housing, uh,
done by aveta, uh, housing authorities.
Uh, all of the capital A affordable housing units also
receive, uh, tax rebates, tips, um,
credit enhancement agreements, uh,
from municipalities in the state.
Um, condos do not because condos are, uh, very expensive.
Um, the, the TIFF was intended to help, uh,
help us develop market rate apartments that would not
otherwise be possible without a subsidy from either low,
low income housing tiff, uh,
or the for sale profits from a, from a luxury condo project.
Um, the, the parking currently in,
in South Portland is free.
Um, a real challenge.
And I think one of the reasons why
you all are not seeing development happen, uh,
within the current planning, uh, is
because there is no parking division yet, uh,
in the city of South Portland.
Um, maybe controversial.
Um, but I would encourage, uh, you all
to visit a parking department, um, and,
and visit parking as a, as a thing.
Uh, I know that that comes with a whole bag of tricks.
Um, but it is very hard to build very expensive
structured parking, which average between 40
and $80,000 per space when it is not possible
to monetize those parking spaces.
Um, I, so I encourage you, uh,
to also consider that at a future time.
Thank you.
Thank you. Okay. Did you wanna say anything
else, councilor Coleman?
Well, a lot of my questions were answered
and my biggest concern is the traffic impact.
And it sounds like that will be addressed by the main DOT
in the, in in traffic engineers.
So I am in support of this project.
Thank you very much. Um, well,
I don't think we need to belabor getting to the vote.
I'll say a couple of, um, words about my own opinion.
I guess the phrase that keeps coming to mind is
don't let the perfect be the enemy of the good.
Yeah. And, um, I see a lot
that is good about this project.
I, I, for me, some
of the perfect part would have included capital a
affordability built into the project.
Um, I think I spoke up about
that early on, um, when we first started discussing this.
Um, it does not seem like it, it has
or will become a part of this project.
Um, I'll continue to root
for affordable housing in South Portland.
Um, the other thing that keeps striking me over
and over again is when folks have said this is
where housing belongs,
because yes, it is in the downtown,
what we call the downtown section
of Maine's fourth largest city.
And, um, from a conservation perspective,
that is far better than considering something
where you're knocking down more trees.
Um, it's near shopping, it's near public transportation,
it's near the trail for, um, parking and biking.
It would promote walkability in a community as far
as parking goes.
I am, I wrote down what our, um, planning director Milan,
said that we have more than enough existing surface parking.
Is surface parking everybody's favorite thing?
From what I've heard tonight, it is not,
do I personally think that a quarter
of South Portland's parking turned surface parking turned
into green space would be better for quality
of life and for the climate.
I do, however, the fact that this parking
exists for this potential development, um,
makes me think we should use it.
Um, the other,
the only other thing I will say about warehousing belongs
and why possibly to Councilor West Point,
we're not hearing from more people in opposition, is
that yes, on the east side
what we have heard people oppose is the idea
of housing in the shadow of the oil storage tanks
and nearer to where we've seen some, um,
the maps projecting some alarming, um, sea level rise.
So again, this is different.
Um, the last thing, did I promise The last thing,
this is really the last thing, is that I am reassured that,
um, the project is going to be reviewed
by our planning board.
That there are going to be questions and answers
and fixes still to be discussed and required.
So, um, I will be voting in favor
and I think it's time to do that.
Roll call vote,
Certainly.
Counselor Coleman? Yes. Counselor Matthews.
Can you come back to me? Yes.
Counselor Pride? Yes. Counselor Walker.
Yes. Counselor West. Yes. Counselor Scott?
Yes. Mayor Tipton. Yes.
Go. Alright.
Alright. I meant that wall up. Just go.
That is a unanimous vote.
I gotta see what else we got going on.
Um, we don't have any action on old citizen.
Pardon me? New vote. Discussion.
Oh, but we do have a second citizen discussion,
but now all the citizens are leaving the residents anyway.
Okay. Here, let's give, give everybody a chance.
Alright. Most of you are saying goodbye to us.
However, if there is anyone
who did not speak in citizen discussion, part one,
who would like to do so?
Now we are available to listen to you.
Anyone in the room? Anyone online?
All right, citizen Discussion part two is closed. Thank you.
We'll move to communication from the city manager.
Uh, I just want to thank everyone for a great, um, uh,
tree light, our, um,
lighting ceremony in the park last week.
Great job by our, um, park staff
and, uh, everyone who helped to organize that event
and brave the cold weather.
Uh, wanna wish everyone here, happy holidays
and we won't see you all again, um,
in this capacity until the new year.
So happy New Year as well next year.
Uh, a lot of good things on the plate to talk about.
And, um, just based on the, uh, look
of the upcoming agenda items, um, last week
and this week will be the anomalies.
We've got a lot of things to tackle.
So rest up and, uh, enjoy the rest of the year
and, uh, happy New Year.
Thank you so much. We'll move to councilors round robin.
Does Counselor Pride want to contribute to round robin?
Not today. I'll pass. Thank you.
Thank you. Councilor West.
I just echo that the lights look fantastic in Mill Creek
Park and I hope the views aren't blocked too much, but,
Okay. You voted for
it,
You know, it's a close Question.
Counselor Matthews, would you like
To get, I just wanna say happy.
Whatever you celebrate. Happy and safe to you.
Thank you, counselor Scott.
Um, thank you.
It feels very strange to have two city council meetings
and then not a lot, which is what I was warned of.
Um, but I, uh, I appreciate being here.
I'm very excited to start 2026.
I think we have a lot of exciting things ahead of us.
And maybe I'll put in a parking workshop,
'cause that could be my legacy
And a fine one.
It will be. Councilor Walker.
Did you have any round robin items?
I just had two quick ones.
First of all, thank you all very much
for accommodating the hybrid bead.
Um, I very, very much appreciate it.
And, uh, secondly, in terms of the office hours,
I will not be able to be there
for the December office hours.
They are still happening.
Uh, mayor P is stilling on, so thank you for that.
Um, and they will be this coming Saturday at the library
from 10 to 12:00 PM and thank you for, um, everything
and happy holidays everyone.
Thank you Counselor Walker. And Counselor Coleman.
Uh, happy holidays
and I very much enjoyed the tree lighting ceremony
and uh, the lights are beautiful lit.
I watched the construction and that was fun too.
Thank you. Um, well,
I just also wanna wish everyone happy holidays
and also to say that, um,
I appreciate my counselors I'll, I'll try
to practice this mirroring thing during our break
so I can be a little smoother.
Um, I appreciated our discussion this evening.
It, it felt thorough and honest
and, uh, um, what we should be doing for our residents.
And, um, the only other thing is that it occurred
to me today when I saw a homeless,
I assume a homeless person, um, asking for, um,
contribution on one of our streets.
That this is the season of giving.
And that, um, if we can remember our homeless shelters
and our warming shelters, um, for those of us
who are going back to warm houses, soft beds, a lot of food,
uh, I think that giving in that way is a,
is a very important thing to do.
So thank you.
And by unanimous consent, I'd like to adjourn the meeting.